docs/index.mdx, before:

# Benry for Ruby


## Overview

* [Benry-CmdOpt](#benry-cmdopt) ... Command-line option parser
* [Benry-CmdApp](#benry-cmdapp) ... Command-line application framework
* [Benry-Config](#benry-config) ... Application configuration library
* [Benry-Recorder](#benry-recorder) ... Test double helper (spy, stub, mock)
* [Benry-UnixCmd](#benry-unixcmd) ... UNIX command implementation


## Benry-CmdOpt

Benry-CmdOpt is a command option parser for Ruby.
Much better than ``optparse.rb`` (Ruby standard library).

Why not ``optparse.rb``? In short, because it has several design mistakes.
Read [this document](benry-cmdopt.html#why-not-optparserb) for details.

[READ MORE >>](benry-cmdopt.html)


## Benry-CmdApp

Benry-CmdApp is a Ruby framework for command-line application that takes subcommands.

If you want to create a command-line application like ``git``, ``docker``, or ``npm``,
Benry-CmdApp is the solution.

[READ MORE >>](benry-cmdapp.html)


## Benry-Config

A small Ruby library for application configuration.

[READ MORE >>](benry-config.html)


## Benry-Recorder

Helper library for Ruby to record method call and create fake object.
Very useful as test double (spy, stub, or mock).

[READ MORE >>](benry-recorder.html)


## Benry-UnixCmd

Basic UNIX command feature implementation in Ruby.
Similar to ``FileUtils.rb``, but much better than it.

[READ MORE >>](benry-unixcmd.html)

Commit message:

[main] docs: add 'benry-unixcommand.html' and update 'index.*'

docs/index.mdx, after:

# Benry for Ruby


## Overview

* [Benry-CmdOpt](#benry-cmdopt) ... Command-line option parser
* [Benry-CmdApp](#benry-cmdapp) ... Command-line application framework
* [Benry-Config](#benry-config) ... Application configuration library
* [Benry-Recorder](#benry-recorder) ... Test double helper (spy, stub, mock)
* [Benry-UnixCmd](#benry-unixcmd) ... UNIX command implementation


## Benry-CmdOpt

Benry-CmdOpt is a command option parser for Ruby.
Much better than ``optparse.rb`` (Ruby standard library).

Why not ``optparse.rb``? In short, because it has several design mistakes.
Read [this document](benry-cmdopt.html#why-not-optparserb) for details.

[READ MORE >>](benry-cmdopt.html)


## Benry-CmdApp

Benry-CmdApp is a Ruby framework for command-line application that takes subcommands.

If you want to create a command-line application like ``git``, ``docker``, or ``npm``,
Benry-CmdApp is the solution.

[READ MORE >>](benry-cmdapp.html)


## Benry-Config

A small Ruby library for application configuration.

[READ MORE >>](benry-config.html)


## Benry-Recorder

Helper library for Ruby to record method call and create fake object.
Very useful as test double (spy, stub, or mock).

[READ MORE >>](benry-recorder.html)


## Benry-UnixCommand

Basic UNIX command feature implementation in Ruby.
Similar to ``FileUtils.rb``, but much better than it.

(NOTICE: Gem package is renamed from [benry-unixcmd](https://rubygems.org/gems/benry-unixcmd) to [benry-unixcommand](https://rubygems.org/gems/benry-unixcommand) since release 1.0.)

[READ MORE >>](benry-unixcommand.html)
